{% extends "blog/layout.tmpl" %}

{% block postTitle %}What's new in dsq: Commandline tool for running SQL queries against data files{% endblock %}
{% block postDate %}March 23, 2022{% endblock %}
{% block postAuthor %}Phil Eaton{% endblock %}
{% block postAuthorEmail %}phil@multiprocess.io{% endblock %}
{% block postTags %}dsq,go,sql,tutorial{% endblock %}

{% block postBody %}
[dsq](https://github.com/multiprocessio/dsq") is an open-source
commandline tool for running SQL queries against many different file
types. It is built on top of [DataStation](/), an app that lets you
query every file, database, API; script data in Python, JavaScript,
Ruby,etc.; and build graphs, dashboards and exports. Everything you
can do in dsq you can do in DataStation, and quite a bit more.

The [introduction
post](https://datastation.multiprocess.io/blog/2022-01-11-dsq.html)
from January goes into more basic details about how you can use
dsq. That post covers dsq before its first release.

There have been 10 releases since then and I've been able to lift
almost all initial restrictions. So I wanted to give you an update.

## Nested objects

You can now query nested objects with dsq. Given the following file `user_address.json`:

```
$ cat user_addresses.json
[
  {"name": "Agarrah", "location": {"city": "Toronto", "address": { "number": 1002 }}},
  {"name": "Minoara", "location": {"city": "Mexico City", "address": { "number": 19 }}},
  {"name": "Fontoon", "location": {"city": "New London", "address": { "number": 12 }}}
]
```

You can query nested fields like so:

```
$ dsq user_addresses.json 'SELECT name, "location.city" FROM {}' | jq
[
  {
    "name": "Agarrah",
    "location.city": "Toronto"
  },
  {
    "name": "Minoara",
    "location.city": "Mexico City"
  },
  {
    "location.city": "New London",
    "name": "Fontoon"
  }
]
```

## Data within a nested array

DataStation defaults to assuming it's working with an array of objects. But some systems store their array data within an object. For example you might have an API response like this:

```
$ cat api-results.json
{
  "data": {
    "data": [
      {"id": 1, "name": "Corah"},
      {"id": 3, "name": "Minh"}
    ]
  },
  "total": 2
}
```

You can now query this in dsq with:

```
$ dsq api-results.json 'SELECT * FROM {0, "data.data"} ORDER BY id DESC' | jq
[
  {
    "id": "3",
	"name": "Minh"
  },
  {
    "id": "1",
	"name": "Corah"
  }
]
```

Similarly if you have an Excel file with multiple sheets you can use
that same path syntax. Swap out the path string for the quoted name of
your sheet:

```
$ dsq data.xlsx 'SELECT COUNT(1) FROM {0, "Sheet2"}'
```

## Array data

You can now access array data within an object. DataStation
transforms arrays into a JSON string. Since SQLite has builtin JSON
operators you can act on these columns as structured data.

So if you have data like this in `fields.json`:

```json
[
  {"field1": [1]},
  {"field1": [2]},
]
```

You can request the entire field:

```
$ dsq fields.json "SELECT field1 FROM {}" | jq
[
  {
    "field1": "[1]"
  },
  {
    "field1": "[2]",
  }
]
```

Or you can get the first value in the array using SQL JSON operators.

```
$ dsq fields.json "SELECT field1->0 FROM {}" | jq
[
  {
    "field1->0": "1"
  },
  {
    "field1->0": "2"
  }
]
```

## New file types

Since the first blog post you can now query newline-delimited JSON,
concatenated JSON, Apache ORC, and ODS (OpenOffice Sheets) files.

Apache ORC support was [contributed by a first-time OSS
developer](https://github.com/multiprocessio/datastation/pull/194).

## Performance improvements

Thanks to switching to
[goccy/go-json](https://github.com/goccy/go-json) and switching to
prepared statements for insertions into SQLite, dsq is now twice as
fast on [OctoSQL's
benchmark](https://github.com/cube2222/octosql#benchmarks) (in my own
testing; the OctoSQL benchmark is not up-to-date using newer dsq
releases). It's still pretty slow but 1) DataStation/dsq does a lot
more than the other tools and 2) it's the youngest among those tools,
and 3) performance is not my greatest concern right now.

## Try it out, become a contributor

Sound interesting? Try out
[DataStation](https://github.com/multiprocessio/datastation) and
[dsq](https://github.com/multiprocessio/dsq)! There is a ton of
relatively easy tasks to pick up if you're trying to break into
OSS. Join the [Discord](https://discord.multiprocess.i) #dev channel
and say hi!

<h4>Share</h4>
{% endblock %}
